day02/worksheets/README.md, before:

# Day 2! Working in the Unix Environment

## WORKSHEETS
## Part 1: Copy a bedGraph file to your home directory and inspect it
Author: Zach Maas, edited by Hope Townsend

*Goal*: Help you familiarize yourself with the unix computing environment by performing some basic tasks and troubleshooting things on your own.

### What you get to do:
1. Log onto the Short Read Workshop server using SSH
2. Move to your user directory on */scratch/Users/<username>*
3. Make a folder called *workshop-day2* and a folder inside of that called *bedfiles*
4. Make folders inside *workshop-day2* called *results*, *scripts*, *bin*, and *data*
5. Copy the gzipped (compressed) folder in */scratch/Shares/public/sread2023/data_files/day2/bedfiles/chr1_bedfiles.tar.gz* to your *bedfiles* directory
   	- Things are gzipped (compressed) if they contain large files or information to save space until you actually need them (think of it as putting stuff in vacuum storage bags)
7. Decompress and extract the *chr1_bedfiles.tar.gz* folder in your *bedfiles* directory
8. Look at the format of the extracted files. What kind of information do these files give you?

### Some help/encouragement:
If you don’t know how to do something, don’t be discouraged! Look at the documentation  we’ve provided below or search the internet for how to do what you’re trying to accomplish. 

**Some useful commands and tools:**
- Basic Utilities:
	- **man** (manual) followed by the name of a command will tell you how to use a  command
 		- This might seem overwhelming at first because it includes everything but getting used to learning how to read this is really helpful
  		- type q or click "esc" to escape from man mode
	- **ssh** lets you log into a remote server like the one we’re using during the short  read workshop 
	- **whoami** will print your current active user
	- **uname-n** This is useful to  make sure you’re actually on the short read server and not your local machine
- Navigating Around:
	- **pwd**  (print working directory) will tell you which directory you’re in 
	- **cd** (change directory) lets you move to a different directory. You can move folders using absolute or relative paths. For example, if  you’re starting in /scratch/ and you want to be in the Workshop directory inside of it, typing cd /scratch/Workshop will move you using  the absolute path and typing cd Workshop will move you using the *relative path* 
		- Reelative paths have some shortcuts .. (two dots) means "the directory immediately above the one that I'm in" and . (one dot) means "the directory that I'm in"
	- **ls** (list) prints out information about the directory that you’re in 
- Working with Files:
	- **mv** (move) moves a file from a source path to a destination path 
	- **cp** (copy) copies a file from a source path to a destination path 
	- **rm** (remove) removes a file or directory. **WARNING** there is no recycle bin on a  unix system. If you remove a file it is gone forever, with no chance of recovery. **DOUBLE CHECK YOUR COMMANDS**
	- **zip/unzip** allows you to create and extract .zip archive files 
	- **tar** (tape archive) allows you to create and extract archive files that have the  extension of .tar, .tar.xz, .tar.gz, and more.  
	- **less** allows you to view files on the command line without editing them
	- **cat** (concatenate) prints out the contents of a file directly to your terminal
	- **head/tail** show you the first and last 10 lines of a file, respectively. These are  useful for quickly making sure a file is in the right format 
	- **vim** is an advanced text editor that allows you to edit files for writing scripts. **nano** is a simpler text editor for writing scripts on the command line 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Part 2: Write a script to move a fastq file

*Goal*: Learn how to take a series of steps like you ran before and combine them into a single script that you can run for reproducbility.

### What you get to do:
1. Make a new file called *download_fastq.sh* in your *workshop-day2/scripts* directory
2. Add *#!/bin/bash* as the first line so that our system knows this is a shell script
3. Write a series of commands on separate lines in your script to copy the fastq files from */scratch/Shares/public/sread2023/data_files/day4/fastq* and put them in your *workshop-day2/data* directory.
4. Modify permissions on your script so that it is executable
5. Run the script and make sure that your file downloads successfully.
6. Back up your script and results to your home directory

Commit message:

add a hint
Former-commit-id: bba9946c4e67cc0262294ba9b323409c67af2f84

day02/worksheets/README.md, after:

# Day 2! Working in the Unix Environment

## WORKSHEETS
## Part 1: Copy a bedGraph file to your home directory and inspect it
Author: Zach Maas, edited by Hope Townsend

*Goal*: Help you familiarize yourself with the unix computing environment by performing some basic tasks and troubleshooting things on your own.

### What you get to do:
1. Log onto the Short Read Workshop server using SSH
2. Move to your user directory on */scratch/Users/<username>*
3. Make a folder called *workshop-day2* and a folder inside of that called *bedfiles*
4. Make folders inside *workshop-day2* called *results*, *scripts*, *bin*, and *data*
5. Copy the gzipped (compressed) folder in */scratch/Shares/public/sread2023/data_files/day2/bedfiles/chr1_bedfiles.tar.gz* to your *bedfiles* directory
   	- Things are gzipped (compressed) if they contain large files or information to save space until you actually need them (think of it as putting stuff in vacuum storage bags)
7. Decompress and extract the *chr1_bedfiles.tar.gz* folder in your *bedfiles* directory
   	- *Hint*: check out the common commands for *Working with Files* and don't forget about the **man** command which can help you learn more about a command
9. Look at the format of the extracted files. What kind of information do these files give you?

### Some help/encouragement:
If you don’t know how to do something, don’t be discouraged! Look at the documentation  we’ve provided below or search the internet for how to do what you’re trying to accomplish. 

**Some useful commands and tools:**
- Basic Utilities:
	- **man** (manual) followed by the name of a command will tell you how to use a  command
 		- This might seem overwhelming at first because it includes everything but getting used to learning how to read this is really helpful
  		- type q or click "esc" to escape from man mode
	- **ssh** lets you log into a remote server like the one we’re using during the short  read workshop 
	- **whoami** will print your current active user
	- **uname-n** This is useful to  make sure you’re actually on the short read server and not your local machine
- Navigating Around:
	- **pwd**  (print working directory) will tell you which directory you’re in 
	- **cd** (change directory) lets you move to a different directory. You can move folders using absolute or relative paths. For example, if  you’re starting in /scratch/ and you want to be in the Workshop directory inside of it, typing cd /scratch/Workshop will move you using  the absolute path and typing cd Workshop will move you using the *relative path* 
		- Reelative paths have some shortcuts .. (two dots) means "the directory immediately above the one that I'm in" and . (one dot) means "the directory that I'm in"
	- **ls** (list) prints out information about the directory that you’re in 
- Working with Files:
	- **mv** (move) moves a file from a source path to a destination path 
	- **cp** (copy) copies a file from a source path to a destination path 
	- **rm** (remove) removes a file or directory. **WARNING** there is no recycle bin on a  unix system. If you remove a file it is gone forever, with no chance of recovery. **DOUBLE CHECK YOUR COMMANDS**
	- **zip/unzip** allows you to create and extract .zip archive files 
	- **tar** (tape archive) allows you to create and extract archive files that have the  extension of .tar, .tar.xz, .tar.gz, and more.  
	- **less** allows you to view files on the command line without editing them
	- **cat** (concatenate) prints out the contents of a file directly to your terminal
	- **head/tail** show you the first and last 10 lines of a file, respectively. These are  useful for quickly making sure a file is in the right format 
	- **vim** is an advanced text editor that allows you to edit files for writing scripts. **nano** is a simpler text editor for writing scripts on the command line 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Part 2: Write a script to move a fastq file

*Goal*: Learn how to take a series of steps like you ran before and combine them into a single script that you can run for reproducbility.

### What you get to do:
1. Make a new file called *download_fastq.sh* in your *workshop-day2/scripts* directory
2. Add *#!/bin/bash* as the first line so that our system knows this is a shell script
3. Write a series of commands on separate lines in your script to copy the fastq files from */scratch/Shares/public/sread2023/data_files/day4/fastq* and put them in your *workshop-day2/data* directory.
4. Modify permissions on your script so that it is executable
5. Run the script and make sure that your file downloads successfully.
6. Back up your script and results to your home directory
