projectB/day07/README.md, before:

# Project B Day 7 | RNA-seq: Counting Reads and Differential Expression

Today we will count RNA-seq reads and use the counts to run *DESeq2*.

First, you will learn to count reads using *featureCounts*. Then, you will learn about exploratory data analysis and QC checks associated with differential analysis. Finally, you will use the differential analysis pipeline *DESeq2* to identify a list of genes which are differentially expressed in our dataset. This list will be used later in the week when we integrate it together with our ChIP-seq results.


## BEFORE WE START

We will do the M and M example. 

Please count your M and Ms and put them here: https://tinyurl.com/MnMstats

- If you are online, I'm sorry we can't give you candy. However, we have a simulation option for you.

i. First login to tha AWS and `cd` into `srworkshop` and run `git pull`. 

ii. Simulate getting candy by running the following R script.

- You can change the size of your handfull to anything between 50 and 150. Here I have it set to 100.

- To sample from the _Green Bowl_, run:
```Rscript /Users/<yourusername>/srworkshop/projectB/day07/mnm_activity/grabahandful.R 100 greenbowl```

- To sample from the _Red Bowl_, run:
```Rscript /Users/<yourusername>/srworkshop/projectB/day07/mnm_activity/grabahandful.R 100 redbowl```


## In-class Worksheets

1. We will start with counting reads using *featureCounts*. Since counting requires more resources, we will be coutning reads on the AWS server. 

- `Day7_featurecounts_worksheet.pdf` worksheet with details on running *featureCounts*
- `d7_featureCounts.R` R script with code to count reads using *featureCounts* from *Rsubread*
- `d7_featureCounts.sbatch` sbatch script that calls the aboive R scripts allowing us to count reads on the server

2. Second, we will perform differential gene expression analysis with *DESeq2*. This process will take in as input read counts from featureCounts.

- `Day7_differential_expression_worksheet.pdf` A worksheet with R code we will run in Rstudio to perform differential gene experession analysis

## Homework

The homework is to perform differential gene expession analysis on a new dataset. In the homework folder, the counts for the dataset are already generated. You will need to generate your own conditions table.

- `Day7_homework.pdf`

Commit message:

Including instructions for students to install Rsubread and DESeq2 first thing in class

projectB/day07/README.md, after:

# Project B Day 7 | RNA-seq: Counting Reads and Differential Expression

Today we will count RNA-seq reads using *Rsubread* and use the counts to run *DESeq2*.

Today, you will learn to count reads using *featureCounts*. Then, you will learn about exploratory data analysis and QC checks associated with differential analysis. Finally, you will use the differential analysis pipeline *DESeq2* to identify a list of genes which are differentially expressed in our dataset. This list will be used later in the week when we integrate it together with our ChIP-seq results.

- Before we start, follow instructions for installing *Rsubread* on AWS in the `Day7_installing_Rsubread.md` worksheet.

> *NOTE:* The AWS   is using an older version of R,   so we will be installing Rsubread from source.
> Follow instructions from "Install Rsubread from Source" section.
> If you are on	      a server with a	     newer R	  version	you can	install	the package from BiocManager.

- Also install *DESeq2* on your personal computer if you have not done so.

## BEFORE WE START

We will go over an M and M example. 

Please count your M and Ms and put them here: https://tinyurl.com/MnMstats

- If you are online, I'm sorry we can't give you candy. However, we have a simulation option for you.

i. First login to tha AWS and `cd` into `srworkshop` and run `git pull`. 

ii. Simulate getting candy by running the following R script.

- You can change the size of your handfull to anything between 50 and 150. Here I have it set to 100.

- To sample from the _Green Bowl_, run:
```Rscript /Users/<yourusername>/srworkshop/projectB/day07/mnm_activity/grabahandful.R 100 greenbowl```

- To sample from the _Red Bowl_, run:
```Rscript /Users/<yourusername>/srworkshop/projectB/day07/mnm_activity/grabahandful.R 100 redbowl```


## In-class Worksheets

1. We will start with counting reads using *featureCounts*. Since counting requires more resources, we will be coutning reads on the AWS server. 

- `Day7_featurecounts_worksheet.pdf` worksheet with details on running *featureCounts*
- `d7_featureCounts.R` R script with code to count reads using *featureCounts* from *Rsubread*
- `d7_featureCounts.sbatch` sbatch script that calls the aboive R scripts allowing us to count reads on the server

2. Second, we will perform differential gene expression analysis with *DESeq2*. This process will take in as input read counts from featureCounts.

- `Day7_differential_expression_worksheet.pdf` A worksheet with R code we will run in Rstudio to perform differential gene experession analysis

## Homework

The homework is to perform differential gene expession analysis on a new dataset. In the homework folder, the counts for the dataset are already generated. You will need to generate your own conditions table.

- `Day7_homework.pdf`
